# Funk SVD:

This dataset is meant for large sparse data. It comes from a 2006 netflix challenge on how to best recommend movies to users. Movie recommendation lists are large and sparse as it is a matrix of $m\times n$ where m is the number of users and n is the movies on netflix. The cells are filled with the rating value the users gave the movies. Since most people do not rate every movie it creates a very large and sparse matrix. This was solved with SVD that made generalizations about the the data.

SVD turns a matrix into three component matricies with the equation $A=UWV^T$ where $U$ is comprised of the eigenvectors of $AA^T$, $W$ is a diagonal matrix of the eigen values of $A^TA$ and $V^T$. with the funk svd method the rows and columns of $U$ and $V$ are not constrained, only the dot product of the two. Funks method changes this to $A=UV^T$ where $U$ is, in the case of netflix, a latent representation of movies, and $V^T$ is a latent representation of the users. Funk initializes this method with a random $U$ and a random $V$ and finds the gradient to train the model to closely aproximate the ranking a user gave to a specific movie.

## This Project:
This project applys the Funk SVD method to a DNA VCF data. These files measure the allele frequency on mutations in the human genome as well as storing the rough location of each sample (Africa (AFR), East Asia (EAS), Europe (EUR), South Asia (SAS), and the Americas (AMR)). Each column in the file is a mutation gene and the value of the cell represents whether the gene is present or not. Since only about 1 mutation in 20 shows itself the data is very sparse. There are 4 different values that can be associated with the mutation. Recieved from the father, recieved from the mother, recieved from both, or recieved from neither. By applying the funk svd method on the DNA file we can try to predict whether a mutation will be present in the genenome of a person based off the general world region they are from. 